For this assignment we went with gun deaths in the US. Our Data Lead decided to
use this data because he frequents FiveThirtyEight and enjoys the visualizations
they use. FiveThirtyEight also is quite transparent about the data they use for
those visualizations so it was easy for our Data Lead to grab a large amount of
data from their cite. Once he found a data set on an interesting topic, gun deaths
in America, he had to decided what variables he wanted to focus on since the
overall set has quite a lot of options. So, he focused in on homicides and suicides
given that those are the most salient factors in gun deaths. Then he had to decide
what would be allow us to differentiate within those groups; race and age are other
prevalent factors when it comes to gun deaths. Though we only focused on particular
parts of this whole data set, our Data Lead is confident that this data set is large
enough that we can expand on our implementation of A3 for our final project using the
same set.

The deliverable visualization we ended on was based on the varying sized circles we
saw in the class demo on D3. We thought this encoding would be the best representation
of gun deaths since we could use the sizes of those circles to represent relative
size of that group’s representation for that category. We also decided to use an option
menu for the intents of those deaths (homicide/suicide) since that clearly tells the
user that these are particular views for the visualization. And we used a slider for
the ages since that would show a clear progression from youngest to oldest age group.
We discussed using other representations for our data like line graphs or bar charts
but decided against it since the transitions between graphs weren’t as easy to track
as the change in circle sizes.

Our Tech Leads (2 people) spent a lot of their time learning JavaScript (JS) and
D3 since they didn’t have much experience outside of the minimal use we have in
previous classes. They agreed it would have been beneficial to have JS and D3
incorporated into the class as an assignment that everyone needs to complete, to
make sure everyone has a higher than surface level understanding of these tools.
They also found D3 to be difficult to use in particular because of the lack of
documentation. They also spent a lot of their time with finicky portions of their
code that required a tedious amount of trial and error. However, we also showed
our visualization to multiple people to see if they were able to easily use our
interface and whether the information we wanted to present was clear. Much of the
suggestions we were given from these test subjects were in the form of subjective
issues like the alignment of text and how quickly transitions occurred but we
agreed that theses aspects could use some tweaking. It was extremely helpful to
receive a fresh set of eyes to judge our visualization as an actual tool as we
were progressing through its implementation.

The way our time was spent as a group is understandable given our roles but we
hope to even it out much more for the final project. Our Data Lead said he spent
about 3 hours looking through FiveThirtyEight for a data set and then
wrangling/cleaning that set. Our Tech Leads said they spent 13-15 hours on the
implementation of our visualization, though a lot of this was learning the
languages to a usable degree, much of it was fixing small issues that weren’t
well documented in D3 which resulted in a lot of wasted time. My role was much
more minimal, I spent about an hour on the slider we used in our visualization
and about an hour writing this write up. Though the Data Lead and I had much less
time-consuming roles we tried to help where we could and provided insight on how
we wanted our final deliverable to look. For the final project the goal is to have
another tech lead to lighten the load off our current two, this will also allow
another set of eyes to be used when finding/fixing issues when they inevitably arise.

Finally, we couldn’t include everything we wanted to in this assignment due to the
shortened timeline. We wanted to make our visualization more able to show multiple
combinations of data at the same time (e.g. showing both homicide and suicide at
the same time rather than one at a time). We also wanted to add annotations about
our data, like explaining anomalies that stood out, these annotations were made (e.g.
White Seniors are more likely to commit suicide because they are more likely to own
guns) but our Tech Leads felt they needed more time to get them working as they wanted
so, we decided a clear, working visualization was more important than adding annotations
that were causing trouble with clarity and ease of use. Both of these exclusions for
A3 we hope to have in our final project because they would provide greater analysis for
a user of our visualization.
